---
layout: default
parent: scripting
grand_parent: norns
title: clocks
nav_order: 3
permalink: /norns/clocks/
---

# clocks

the clock library provides a way to create timed function calls: loops, repetition, and delays. synchronization is possible and time base can come from a variety of sources. the clock library uses lua coroutines.

curious to see it all work together in realtime? here's an introduction to working with clocks + [softcut](/docs/norns/softcut):

<div style="padding:56.25% 0 0 0;position:relative;"><iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/416730766?byline=0&portrait=0" style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen" allowfullscreen></iframe></div><script src="https://player.vimeo.com/api/player.js"></script>

## commands

- `id = clock.run( func )` &mdash; start a new coroutine with function _func_. returns _id_
- `clock.cancel( id )` &mdash; cancel coroutine _id_
- `clock.sleep( time )` &mdash; resume in _time_ seconds
- `clock.sync( beats )` &mdash; resume at _beats_ count according to global tempo
- `beats = clock.get_beats()` &mdash; returns current time in _beats_
- `tempo = clock.get_tempo()` &mdash; returns current _tempo_
- `beat_sec = clock.get_beat_sec()` &mdash; returns length of a single beat at current tempo in seconds

## callbacks

these functions can be script defined and are called by system events:

- `clock.transport.start` &mdash; called by transport start
- `clock.transport.stop` &mdash; called by transport stop

## use

### simple delay

`clock.run` starts a new coroutine with the function you provide:

```lua
function init()
  print("starting now")
  clock.run(later)
  print("done with init")
end

function later()
  clock.sleep(2)
  print("now awake")
end
```

when executed, you will see _starting now_, _done with init_, (two seconds delay and then): _now awake_. `clock.run` starts a coroutine with the function `later`. this function immediately sleeps for two seconds, which means the `init` function resumes and finishes before `later` is able to print its output.

### repetition and sync

you can sleep according to units of tempo (beats) by using `clock.sync` instead of `clock.sleep`.

```lua
engine.name = 'PolyPerc'

function strum()
  for i=1,8 do
    clock.sync(1/4)
    engine.hz(i*100)
  end
end

function key(n,z)
  if n==3 and z==1 then
    clock.run(strum)
  end
end
```

this script starts a new coroutine when K3 is pressed. the `strum` function plays eight notes, sleeping for 1/4 of a beat (= 1/16th note in 4/4) between notes, synced to the global tempo.

you can change the global tempo using parameters via command or menu. see the later section.

### arguments

pass arguments to a clock function by appending them within the `clock.run` call:

```lua
engine.name = 'PolyPerc'

function strum(n,speed)
  for i=1,n do
    clock.sync(1/speed)
    engine.hz(i*100)
  end
end

function key(n,z)
  if n==3 and z==1 then
    clock.run(strum, math.random(16), math.random(8))
  end
end
```

now each `strum` is executed with different arguments. note that you can overlap multiple runs by pressing the key rapidly! a new coroutine is started with each run, so you can have numerous processes running at once.

`clock.sync` sleeps until the next subdivision specified arrives, so the timing is effectively quantized to the global tempo (which is the goal of this use case).

### loop

so far all of our coroutines end by themselves, by reaching the end of their own execution. we can create forever-running loops using a `while true` inner loop. these will continue running until you launch a new script or cancel them manually with `clock.cancel`.

to cancel a coroutine, you need to store the `id` generated by `clock.run`. we later use this `id` with `clock.cancel`.

```lua
engine.name = 'PolyPerc'

function forever(freq)
  while true do
    clock.sync(1/4)
    engine.hz(freq)
  end
end

function init()
  clock_id = clock.run(forever, 220)
end

function key(n,z)
  if n==3 and z==1 then
    clock.cancel(clock_id)
  end
end
```


### multiples

you can run lots of coroutines at once: up to 100.

in this script we capture `id`s using a table so we can cancel them in the future.

```lua
engine.name = 'PolyPerc'

function forever(freq,rate)
  while true do
    clock.sync(1/rate)
    engine.hz(freq)
  end
end

function init()
  voice = {}
  voice[1] = clock.run(forever,333,3)
  voice[2] = clock.run(forever,666,1)
  voice[3] = clock.run(forever,999,2)
  voice[4] = clock.run(forever,111,0.33)
end
```
use maiden's command line to cancel individual voices, eg `clock.cancel(voice[3])`

### complex timing

multiple `clock.sync` and `clock.sleep` commands are allowed within the same function. this script creates a swing rhythm:

```lua
engine.name = 'PolyPerc'

function forever(freq)
  while true do
    clock.sync(2/3)
    engine.hz(freq)
    clock.sync(1/3)
    engine.hz(freq)
  end
end

function init()
  clock.run(forever,333)
end
```

### query

you can query the current tempo, beats, and seconds-per-beat:

```lua
print(clock.get_tempo())
t = clock.get_beats()
softcut.loop_start(1,clock.get_beat_sec())
```

### callbacks

scripts can define their own callback functions for transport start and stop:

```lua
engine.name = 'PolyPerc'

function pulse()
  clock.sync(1/4)
  engine.hz(333)
end

function clock.transport.start()
  print("we begin")
  id = clock.run(pulse)
end

function clock.transport.stop()
  clock.cancel(id)
end
```

remote start/stop events can be generated by link or external midi.

*[nb. from Ableton](https://www.ableton.com/en/manual/link-synchronization-and-rewire/): Link currently provides tempo sync and a grid to which apps can align. In Live 9, there are no Song Position or Start/Stop messages sent via Link, nor can any other MIDI data be sent. In Live 10 the feature “Start Stop Sync” (which can be found Live's Link/MIDI preferences) additionally shares Transport Start and Stop Commands.*


## parameters

the `CLOCK` menu is available in the `PARAMETERS` screen.

### source

this sets the sync source for the global tempo.

- `internal` sets norns as the clock source
- `midi` takes any external midi clock via connected USB midi devices
- `link` enables ableton link sync for the connecting wifi network
- `crow` takes sync from input 1 of a connected crow device

link has a `link quantum` parameter to set the quantum size.

crow additionally has a `crow in div` parameter to specify the number of sub-divisions per beat.

the `tempo` parameter sets the internal and link tempos. this tempo will be automatically updated if set by an external source (midi, crow, or remote link device).

you can set the tempo in your script by the normal method of setting parameters:

```lua
params:set("clock_tempo",100)
```

### out

clock signals can be transmitted via midi or crow.

`midi out` sets the port number (which midi device, via SYSTEM > DEVICES) on which to transmit.

`crow out` sets the output number, and also has a `crow out div` setting for beat subdivisions.

---
